### Planning
- DNA
- Haemoglobin
- Enzymes
- Membrane transport

### Essay
Proteins are one of the core building blocks that allow life to exist, they serve a purpose in almost every aspect of biological processes, bellow I have outlined a few of the most common uses.

Complex Proteins are synthesised by ribosomes which receive mRNA from DNA. DNA is the genetic code of organisms and is broken up into base triplets which code of an individual amino acid, the order of these triplets is what decides the order of amino acids in polypeptide chains. DNA helicase  (which is an enzyme, another extremely important use of proteins) unwinds the DNA strands which allows them to be separated by another enzyme. RNA synthase (yet another enzyme) synthesises a complimentary strand of mRNA which is complimentary to the base sequence of the DNA. This mRNA is then transported to the ribosomes (which are also protein based) which then assemble polypeptide chains using tRNA. 2 triplets can fit inside the ribosome at a time and the tRNA which has anticodons of the base bring over 2 amino acids that match which are fused together in the growing polypeptide chain. My point here is that proteins are essential even for their own synthesis. As shown by the usage of multiple protein based structures such as enzymes and ribosomes. This creates an interesting paradox where in existing proteins are required for new ones to be synthesised, this is one of the biggest questions biologists have about the origin of life.

Enzymes themselves are essential protein based structured, they are created by the same processes illustrated above and consist of a complex tertiary structure held together by ionic bonds, disulphide bridges and hydrogen bonds. These molecules act as biological catalysts, they help speed up a reaction without being used up. This is possible because enzymes have what is called an active site which is an area of the protein that is complimentary to another molecule, also known as a substrate. Depending on the model used, the active site is either considered completely complimentary or partially complimentary. The latter of these is known as the induced fit model which is the most commonly accepted model by today's standards. It speculates that enzymes must change the shape of their active sites to form around the substrate, allowing for an enzyme substrate complex to be formed. As mentioned before, enzymes can be reused over and over, this is not true if the enzyme is denatured! An enzyme becomes denatured if the pH or temperature changed beyond what it is used to. When this happens, hydrogen bonds in the active site are broken and the shape of the active site changes making them useless. To conclude, enzymes play an essential role in the speed up of reactions, without them many reactions which are essential for cellular function would slow down or even grind to a halt completely.

Another common use for proteins in complex organisms is haemoglobin. This molecule is a quaternary protein made up of 4 polypeptides, each connected to a synthetic haem group which contains an iron ion (Fe). This gives it a red colour. This protein is found in blood cells found in the blood and is an important component in the circulatory system. This allows the transport of oxygen to respiring tissues such as muscle fibers which helps them synthesise energy. I don't need to explain to you why this is essential for complex, multicellular life where simple diffusion alone is not enough due to a low surface area to volume ratio.

Membrane transport is yet another common use of protein based structures. These come in the form of carrier proteins and channel proteins which facilitate the movement of molecules which cannot pass through the phospholipid bilayer of the cell membrane or need to be actively transported against their concentration gradient. These structures are embedded in the membrane and are complimentary in shape to the molecule they are designed to transport. Channel proteins do not require energy as they rely on facilitated diffusion alone to move molecules in or out of the cell. This is a contrast to carrier proteins which often move molecules against their concentration energy so require energy in the form of ATP. Another type of transporter protein that I did not mention before are co-transport proteins. These use the concentration gradient of another molecule to move another against its own. An example of this is the sodium potassium pump which facilitates the transport of glucose into the ilium. This function is essential for the absorption of glucose and without it nutrient absorption would be extremely limited.

In conclusion, using the examples mentioned this proves how truly essential protein is for biological function. Without them life itself (as we know it) would not be possible.

+12 mins