The cell surface membrane consists of a phospholipid bilayer. This is useful as it allows small, lipid soluble molecules such as CO2 and O2 to diffuse freely. Larger molecules require carrier/channel proteins which are imbedded in this bilayer to pass through. An example of such a mechanism is the sodium potassium pump which allows glucose and amino acids to diffuse through the surface membrane of the epithelial cells in the ilium. This is imortant as it allows glucose to enter the bloodstream and be transported to respiring tissues for use in respiration. Without co transporter system it is impossible for the body to take up sufficient glucose for respiration, leading to a decrease in metabolic function.

The cell surface membrane is also essential for the nervous system. This is because it acts as a barrier which allows a difference in concentrations of sodium and potassium on either side of the membrane. The difference in concentrations between this membrane generates a voltage which is refered to as an action potential. Changes in this concentration is what stimulates these signals. This action potential is what allows electrochemical signals to be transmitted and is what allows the nervous system to function. Everything from senses, reflexes and the ability for conscious thought is only possible because of the nervous system meaning that without the cell surface membrane nervous communication and by extension complex life would simply not be possible

The cell surface membrane also plays a vital role in the immune system. It provides a surface where antigens can be displayed which are essentially chemical markers that distinguish a cell. These chemical markers are especially important in the humoral immune system which involves the process of antigen presentation of pathogen cells on the surface of phagocytes which allow for antibodies to be synthesised. These antibodies are complimentary to the antigens found on the known pathogen and kill said pathogen. Without the surface membrane cellular recognition would not be possible as there would be no surface for antigens to cling to. This would essentially entirely bypass the immune system making us extremely susceptible to infection.