- Topics
	- Genome project
	- Fingerprinting
	- Cancer treatment
	- Gene cloning

- One extremely important use of DNA is in genome projects. Genome projects involve sequencing the entire genome of an organism and is only possible by reading the base sequence of DNA strands which store genetic information. This is accomplished by cutting the DNA into smaller, manageable sections and using computer algorithms to align overlapping sections to construct the entire genome. This is known as whole-genome shotgun sequencing. This process has allowed us to map out specific sections of DNA such as single nucleotide polymorphisms which are associated with diseases and other disorders. This has opened the door to a number of different methods of treating such diseases, some of which will be mentioned later.

- A more practical use of DNA is in genetic fingerprinting. This is extremely useful as it allows the identification of specific individuals using just a fragment of DNA. This is essential in forensics and is an important way evidence can be gathered when a crime is committed. The characteristic that makes this possible is the fact that DNA contains a number of repeating non coding base sequences known as variable number tandem repeats. Every individual has a unique sequence and length of these VNTRs which gives everyone (except identical twins) a unique genetic fingerprint. People who are related also possess similar VNTR sequences which also makes genetic fingerprinting useful in testing the relatedness of 2 people. DNA is first cut into fragments using the enzyme restriction endonucleases. The process of gel electrophoresis is then used to separate DNA fragments according to their size. This is done by suspending the DNA fragments in an agar gel and applying an electrical voltage across it. Due to resistance larger fragments will take longer to move, leading to them becoming sorted largest to smallest. The DNA fragments are then separated using an alkali and DNA probes which are radioactively marked are added to bind to the VNTRs which they are complimentary to. Using an xray film these radioactive base sequences show up causing a series of bars to appear. These can then be compared to known sequences to find a match. As stated this is important as it helps identify and test the relatedness of 2 samples, without this technology it would be extremely difficult to do this as pate

- 