>Describe and explain how the Earth’s biota affects the chemical composition of the atmosphere.

The biotic aspects of Earth have an enormous effect on atmospheric composition. This is mainly related to the ratio of oxygen to carbon dioxide. Carbon dioxide is the result of respiration in animals so the abundance of them increases co2's atmospheric percentage. Plants are also an important factor as they produce oxygen from carbon dioxide. These are the essential processes that are part of the biological carbon cycle. Ratios of plants to animals is an important biological factor in the way this cycle is balanced. Throughout geological time this has changed significantly, that I will illustrate later with examples.

As mentioned before, the biological carbon cycle is the core process involved in biological effect on the composition of the atmosphere. This all starts with photosynthesis. In this process atmospheric carbon (co2) is converted by plants into an organic form as carbohydrates and proteins. This atmospheric co2 is removed from the system and goes into the plant's biomass.  This co2 eventually goes back into the atmosphere when the plants are consumed by other organisms which aerobically respire (or eventually die). This is why as I stated earlier, the ratio of animals to plants is an important factor in the ratio of oxygen to carbon dioxide in the atmospheric system.

The Cambrian explosion is the first evidence of this change being driven by biotic processes. Single celled organisms in the ocean exploded in population, which caused oxygen levels in the atmosphere to sharply rise. This was an extreme change as carbon dioxide was in high concentration before this period and oxygen made up only a fraction of the atmosphere's composition (find out the exact figures). This higher oxygen content  provided the right conditions for more complex life to evolve and thus can be described as the catalyst for further atmospheric change.

Another major example of this is the Carboniferous period, often referred to as the age of oxygen. This period of elevated oxygen content and low carbon dioxide (figures) was due to a high abundance of plant growth. Tree ferns dominated the primordial swamps that were common at the time. What's more, bacteria capable of breaking down dead plant matter had not evolved by this period so the carbon absorbed from photosynthesis would be removed from the fast carbon cycle and would cause carbon dioxide levels to decline over time (make clear). These biotic driven factors clearly had a huge effect on the global chemical composition of the atmosphere (how).

In conclusion this shows the importance of biota on the chemical composition of the atmosphere.

>Describe the main ways in which water quality in rivers is affected by pollution and outline the options for water quality treatment. 

The Earth's aquatic ecosystems are particularly vulnerable to the effects of pollutants. This is exacerbated when it comes to rivers which often cover a large area so are able to pick up more pollutants.

An example I will discuss first is nutrient pollution as a result of intensive agriculture. Excessive use of fertilizers can has an extreme effect on water bodies such as rivers. Heavy rainfall events wash organic and inorganic fertilizers into rivers. These fertilizers over saturate the river with nitrogen heavy chemicals. The abundance of these chemicals stimulates heavy algal growth, which out competes other plant life. Once this algae reaches critical mass and has used up all these chemicals it dies off. This creates the perfect environment for aerobic bacteria to thrive which in turn uses up all the nutrients as well as the oxygen. This causes mass die offs, releasing toxic levels of ammonia into the river and due to the lack of oxygen this cannot be broken down aerobically. This essentially transforms the river into an anaerobic, toxic environment. This process is known as eutrophication. 

This can be managed in a number of ways, in my opinion the best way to manage it is to prevent it from occurring to begin with. This can be achieved in a number of ways such as governmental policy restricting the use of more intensive fertilizers, The diversion of rivers away from farm land and consistent monitoring of water quality. In the event that prevention is nonviable there are yet more ways the problem can be remedied. I am a big fan of biological filtration as I believe it is the most natural and sustainable option. Plants such as water hyacinths are excellent for such a use case. They are fast growing and extremely hardy. They in fact do such a good job at sucking up excess nutrients that it can be argued that these plants may restrict the growth of beneficial plants/algae and may have a negative impact on river ecology. However for the sake of this question this is irrelevant.

Another example of river pollution is that created from nearby roads. Car exhausts release a lot of toxic chemicals such as heavy metals and sulphurous compounds. These chemicals are outright toxic and can heavily pollute rivers, causing even larger die offs then those created by eutrophication. 