---
tags: [misc]
---

>Describe the main ways in which water quality in rivers is affected by pollution and outline the options for water quality treatment.

The Earth's aquatic ecosystems are particularly vulnerable to the effects of pollutants. This is exacerbated when it comes to rivers which often cover a large area so are able to pick up more pollutants. Anthropogenic threats pose a huge threat to rivers which are an essential geographic feature which enables water to travel to different ecosystems. This means that river pollution not only affects the rivers themselves (which contain complex ecosystems) but also environments which and organisms which rely on them such as animals which drink from rivers and environments such as marshes which use rivers as a source of water

An example I will discuss first is nutrient pollution as a result of intensive agriculture. Excessive use of fertilizers can has an extreme effect on water bodies such as rivers. Heavy rainfall events wash organic and inorganic fertilizers into rivers. These fertilizers over saturate the river with nitrogen heavy chemicals. The abundance of these chemicals stimulates heavy algal growth, which out competes other plant life. Once this algae reaches critical mass and has used up all these chemicals it dies off. This creates the perfect environment for aerobic bacteria to thrive which in turn uses up all the nutrients as well as the oxygen. This causes mass die offs, releasing toxic levels of ammonia into the river and due to the lack of oxygen this cannot be broken down aerobically. This essentially transforms the river into an anaerobic, toxic environment. This process is known as eutrophication.

This can be managed in a number of ways, in my opinion the best way to manage it is to prevent it from occurring to begin with. This can be achieved in a number of ways such as governmental policy restricting the use of more intensive fertilizers, The diversion of rivers away from farm land and consistent monitoring of water quality. In the event that prevention is nonviable there are yet more ways the problem can be remedied. I am a big fan of biological filtration as I believe it is the most natural and sustainable option available. Plants such as water hyacinths are excellent for such a use case. They are fast growing and extremely hardy. They in fact do such a good job at sucking up excess nutrients that it can be argued that these plants may restrict the growth of beneficial plants/algae and may have a negative impact on river ecology. However for the sake of this question this is irrelevant. Whats more, they are unable to survive the frosts of UK winters. This means that the risk of them becoming invasive is relatively low.

Another example of river pollution is that created from nearby roads which are major emission sources. Car exhausts release a lot of toxic chemicals such as heavy metals and sulphurous compounds. These chemicals are outright toxic and can heavily pollute rivers, causing even larger die offs then those created by eutrophication. This can be extremely difficult to manage so we have less options available for treating this.

A method which can be effectively used to solve this issue is activated carbon filtration. This works by filtering water through a granulated mass of charcoal, which absorbs heavy metals. This method has been found to be a cost-effective, easily available alternative to more costly chemical filtration methods. This means that this method is available to developing countries and can be done on a mass scale in post industrialized countries, where the extent of this pollution has the greatest effect.
