>What are the impacts of deforestation on biodiversity, soils and climate?

Deforestation has a devastating effect on any forest ecosystem. It throws almost everything out of balance and in some cases it can be difficult to reverse this damage. For this essay I will talk about a particular type of forest i am most interested in; tropical rainforests, namely the Amazon Rainforest.

Soils are the foundation of any ecosystem so I will talk about them first, they provide the medium for producers (plants) to grow which in turn serve as the base of any food web in an ecosystem. Deforestation can affect soil composition in radical ways. This is well illustrated by the oxidation of soil in the Amazon rainforest (Terra petra) which is caused by iron oxide. This happens when the soil gets exposed after vegetation is cleared. Heavy rainfall causes complete oxidation of iron ions and turns the soil into an infertile mud. It is important to note that rainforest soil is already extremely infertile as most nutrients are stored in the biomass. This is possible because the humid conditions allow for rapid decomposition of leaf litter which means that nutrients are quickly reabsorbed by tree roots. Whats more any nutrients that are not absorbed are quickly washed away by heavy rainfall. All this means that when trees are cut down and removed, a very large percentage of the nutrients such as Nitrogen and other minerals in the ecosystem are permanently removed from the cycle. This, coupled with rainforest soil's oxidation, means that it can be extremely difficult for soil to be able to support rainforests again after they are initially cleared

Another foundation that supports the biodiversity of an ecosystem is climate. Deforestation can effect local and even global climate to some degree. Any trees in a forest act as carbon sinks, as they absorb CO2 through photosynthesis. This removes CO2 from the atmosphere which is useful in reducing the effects of global warming. Not surprisingly removing trees via deforestation has the opposite effect. This causes global warming to accelerate which effects global climates. On a more local scale, deforestation can cause other issues. Trees transpire which means that forests usually are slighly more humid than other environments. In the case of tropical rainforests, this keeps the forest floor cool and moist which creates the perfect environment for decomposition. Deforestation once again causes the opposite effect, the climate becomes hotter and dryer. This makes the land poor quality for farming (ironic right!) which is often the cause of large scale deforestation.

Biodiversity is probably affected the most by deforestation. It is estimated that over 100 species of plants and animals are lost each day in the amazon rain forest due to deforestation. Deforestation destroys habitats for organisms and thus disrupts their ecological niche.